Detroit and the Myth of the $100 House | Uprooted , an eco / travel blog America 's Rust Belt is a swath of citiesS and townsS that boomed during the Industrial Era and now lie -- well , rusting -- as empty remaindersS of glory daysS past . 

Chief among these is Detroit , Motor City . 
The longtime center of American automotive manufacturing was gutted when the Big Three car companiesS simultaneously failed . 

Detroit , already plagued by corruption and crime , saw its unemployment rate skyrocket in 2009 . 

What 's left behind when an economy collapses ? 
Cheap real estate , that 's what . 

I 'd read a New York Times article about some forward - thinking artist - typesS who bought a house in Detroit for $1,900 . 
$1,900 ! 
Some of us ( and lotsS of New YorkersS ) pay that much in rent every month ! 

In fact , the article went on , soon a nearby house went on the market for $100 . 
The artist typesS notified their buddiesS , who moved in post haste . 

I was intrigued . 
Really ? 
A $100 house ? 
Even if it was a real fixer - upper , even if you really were betterR off tearing it down than living in it , that 'd still be a hell of a deal . 
Why , out in New Mexico , where you can still buy unincorporated land with no water or roadsS , you 'd pay at leastS $1,000 for a house-sized plot of dust . 
So how can you buy an actual home for $100 ? 
That 's literally cheaperR than dirt . 

The possibilitiesS of this were fascinating . 
I had visionsS of hipstersS from coast to coast converging in Detroit , building a new city on rock & roll . 
I pictured young artistsS owning homesS , fixing up neighborhoodsS . 
I saw community gardensS , art parksS , a grassrootsS transformation of a city . 
We could take that oil - stained soil and those rusted factoriesS , and create something new and beautiful . 
With housesS going for $100 , I thought , what would you have to lose by moving to Detroit ? 

And so Quiet Earp and I did some research , and came up with a list of housesS selling for under a grand . 
We had plenty to choose from : there were moreR cheap housesS than we would have time to visit . 
We picked two neighborhoodsS to cruise , and dove in . 

But once we entered Detroit , the truth hit fast : this is a modern American ghost town . 
The place is practically deserted . 
Its streetsS , built wide to accommodate heavy traffic , are mostly empty . 
HousesS and businessesS are boarded up , painted up , bombed out and falling down . 
Even in the center of the business district , there 's no traffic and hardly any peopleS . 

Do n't believe me ? 
I videotaped it : 

It got worseR as we drove into residential areasS , looking for those cheap housesS . 
In fact , I 've never felt so out of place in all my life . 
Even in Chicago 's South Side , where we counted five white peopleS in an hour , I felt fine just driving around ; not so in Detroit . 
Truthfully , it was n't about race : it was about being naive . 
It was about driving down streetsS where we truly did not belong and were not welcome . 

Detroit is a ghost town , and it 's inhabited by ghostsS : the only peopleS left here are those who ca n't or wo n't leave . 
They live in deserted neighborhoodsS , in housesS with collapsed front stepsS and missing windowsS . 
They sit on the porch and watch the carsS go by , watch the dealsS go down , watch their neighborhoodsS crumble . 
And we , driving through slowly and reading house numbersS in a late - model Honda , stuck out like a couple of thumbsS . 

So we sped up , and went straight to the housesS . 
Sometimes we stopped to take a photo , but mostly we did n't . 
Earp and I have each lived happily in the wildsS of West Oakland , but the danger I felt in Detroit was like nothing I 'd experienced before . 
I was actually afraid for my life . 

The New York Times correspondent wrote that his friend Mitch 's $1,900 home " had already been stripped of its appliancesS and wiring ... 
But for Mitch that only added to its appeal , because he now had the opportunity to renovate it with solar heating , solar electricity and low-cost , high-efficiency appliancesS . 
" 
As for the $100 house ? 
It " needed some work , a hole patched , some windowsS replaced . " 

Well , I do n't know what part of Detroit these folksS live in , but the $100 housesS I saw looked moreR like this : 

You see , abandoned housesS in this town get set on fire . 
No exceptionsS . 
Wherever we went in those neighborhoodsS , one in four housesS had been torched . 
On one corner , we saw a giant banner hung across a charred front porch . 
We did n't slow down to take a photo , but I 'll paraphrase : DO N'T BURN HOUSESS DOWN ! 
DETROIT POLICE ARE WATCHING YOU ! 

Except that they obviously are n't . 
PeopleS who live in this part of town are on their own . 
And although I and many othersS would love to own even a fire - scarred , condemned building , the fact is that we would n't last a week here . 
Buy a $100 house in Detroit , and you get a lifetime supply of sleepless nightsS : you 'll spend the next several yearsS waiting for burglarsS and arsonistsS , murderersS and crackheadsS to break in the windowsS . 

It 's like the Wild West without the scenery , the gold , and the hope . 
It 's the Rust Belt . 

Ultimately , I do believe that change will come to Detroit . 
There will be a green movement here ; in fact it 's already being cultivated by forward - thinking groupsS and intrepid localsS . 
One day , this place will be reborn . 

But right now , the NYT 's story reeks of Shinola . 

Truth is , any artist - type who moves into this part of Detroit is probably pretty handy with a pistol or a shotgun . 
Anyone who takes this plunge is risking their life every day , betting on a future that may take a long time to arrive . 

Long story short : Yes , you can buy a house in Detroit for $100 . 
And you will get what you pay for . 

CheersS to Toby Barlow , who inspired my trek to Detroit , and who believes in a happierR , greenerR future . 
May your every dream come true , sir , and your book sell fabulously . 

16 ResponsesS to " Detroit and the Myth of the $100 House " bisnisS 16 . Sep , 2009 at 9:46 pm 
Great post . 
Thank you for this info . 
I need that 

Myself 19 . Sep , 2009 at 10:06 am 
Please track down and watch a movie called " Detroit : A City to Yourself " , by Nicole MacDonald . 
It 's full of this imagery , and talks about the 1805 fire and rebuilding , and the post - industrial devastation that 's ravaged the city since . 

MostS poignantly , it talks about Hurricane Katrina , which focused attention on rebuilding another city with this level of devastation , and how without a single catastrophic event to blame for it , Detroit 's decay has gone unsympathetically ignored . 

The movie wraps up by observing this , how abandoned buildingsS and spacesS are being reclaimed by nature . 
About the pop fiction which explores the concept of a post - human world , and how it already exists now . 
And about how , if you 're a pheasant , that 's not such a bad thing . 

HOWEVER ... 

There 's a lot moreR to Detroit than that . 
There are industrial spacesS being turned into low-rent artist loftsS and business incubatorsS . 
( Look at the Russell Industrial Complex , for one example . ) 
There are neighborhoodsS that refuse to cave . 
( west of Livernois around McNichols ) . 
There 's a whole bunch of nice stuff happening along the riverfront , from downtown up towards Stroh Place . 

And there 's always Belle Isle . 
When friendsS come to Detroit , I take them there . 
It 's our in - the - river park , 982 acresS of green space , with a zoo , a botanical garden and conservatory , rentable paddle boatsS , and tonsS of other neat stuff . 
Next time you 're in Detroit , please head over . 
Oh , and entry is free , so it 's available to anyone regardless of economic status . 
You 're liable to see familiesS picnicking , bumsS gathering bottlesS and cansS , geese foraging , and deerS cautiously wandering the edge of the woodsS . 
Within a hundred yardsS of each other . 

Some of that cheap real estate is n't too horrible , either . 
There 's a whole street being taken over by artistsS , Farnsworth between Moran and McDougall . 
Some of the thingsS they 've done down there are amazing , and the community garden is a great bridge to the surrounding neighborhood . 
A few weeksS ago , someone broke into their shed to steal their garden toolsS . 
Think about that for a moment , hoesS and shovelsS do n't have enough pawn value to be worth carrying out . 
Whoever took that stuff is probably using it in their own garden . 

Yes , Detroit 's got moreR than its share of bad spotsS , you 're right . 
I 've lived in the metro area my whole life , and there are areasS ( I ca n't call them neighborhoodsS ) down there where I do n't feel safe in daytime , much lessR at night . 
But there are bright spotsS , and behind every one of them is a person , or a bunch of peopleS , who refuse to give up . 

Jessica 19 . Sep , 2009 at 10:30 am 
Myself -- ThanksS for the comment and the great information . 
You are exactly the kind of person who gives me back the hope I lost on my way into town . 
Seems there 's a pretty solid group of Detroit residentsS who are truly committed to restoring the city , and that 's beautiful to see . 

Love the fact that peopleS are stealing garden implements ( though it 's still sad that they need to ) . 

I will absolutely watch A City To Yourself , thank you for the recommendation . 
And when I 'm in the area again , I 'll go out to Belle Isle and think long & hard about the future of American citiesS -- as I 'm sure you do occasionally too . 

Reader Not Writer 20 . Sep , 2009 at 10:17 pm 
Well , growing up not far from Detroit myself , I would point out a few thingsS : 

1 . Driving a Honda in Detroit right now probably is n't really going to get you welcomed with open armsS . 
See , there 's a wee bit of loyalty to the Big 3 and driving a foreign car does n't really scream " solidarity " to those struggling to survive . 
MostS of the funny looksS you got were lessR about your color than about your ride . 
You think I 'm kidding , but I could n't be moreR serious -- that Honda is a visceral reminder for peopleS of how the American consumer has left Detroit in the dust . 

2 . Detroit ( proper ) has been dying for a long time -- before the 1968 riotsS , even . 
It s going to take some pioneering individualsS to start creating those pocketsS of innovation , creativity , and vision . 
But it s not going to happen with the investment of $100 into a single house . 
Someone will need to begin by creating an urban " oasis " that mitigates some of the fearsS that you had while driving through the city -- where to buy groceriesS , a place where you can feel safe on your own front porch , the freedom to sleep soundly without worrying about your copper wiring . 

3 . For all that is wrong with Detroit -- and that 's nearly everything -- you 'd be astonished by the pride that DetroitersS have for their city . 
They lack the meansS to build her back to her former glory , but she wo n't be abandoned . 
For all of those who are trapped there by their circumstancesS , there are just as many who insist that they would n't live anywhere else . 

Raggedy Anarchy 21 . Sep , 2009 at 7:21 pm 
Thank you for the opportunity to see post - BushCo era Detroit through the prism of your vision . 

I 've never been there , but ever since that mad , possessed American History Professor I had , I 've been haunted by Detroit . 
No , even before that -- The Dollmaker has often been called ' America 's leastS pretentious masterpiece ' . 
( Joyce Carol Oates in the NYTBR ) 
When folksS like Gertie Nevels , and Levon Helm and John Hiatt and my favorite , John Henry , left the mountainsS to go wrestle with the Industrial leviathan in Detroit , they were in it to the death . 
Detroit wo n't be the death of the courage of those early Detroit pioneersS ; it looks like Nature will prevail after all . 
Everybody winsS . 

I love what you are doing . 

Uncle B 18 . Oct , 2009 at 7:53 am 
Is this the monument left behind for the world to witness , by Corporatism , Capitalism ? 
Is this the greatness they built on earth ? 
Is this the proof that all countriesS deserve democracy and its inevitable cancersS , corporatism and capitalism ? 
We die in war to bring this to other countriesS ? 
This , American Glory ? 
In a class - less society ? 
This is the final phase , the crowning glory of America 's greatness ? 
Does this show our system 's superiority over the commiesS in China ? 
The old Soviet Guard ? 
Europe 's folliesS ? 
Have we really built a " Great Society " or is that all propaganda -- Bull Shiite to hush free thought , eyesS to the flag , while our pocketsS and resourcesS were raided by shystersS , spin - meistersS , schmucksS and bankstersS ? 
Did we build sane , sustainable , survival shelter homesS ? 
Do we still have fertile backyard gardensS , filled with the composting of the age ? 
Can any of what we built be recovered , restored , renovated , into useful shelter ? 
Did the toolsS of production really get sold , to the shareholdersS benefit , leaving the worker without meansS to defend himself ? 
Have the great fortunesS earned in trust as " American " for American investment here in America , really migrated to the Beijing , Shanghai , and Hang - Seng marketsS , converted to saferR " Yuan " and invested in China 's wealth ? 
Did this really happen to American patriotsS ? 
Do you still love democracy , corporatism , capitalism and all it has done for you ? 
Are you really " Free " ? 
Is Conscription just around the corner , to serve Halliburton ( Dubai ) in attaining pipeline clearance through Afghanistan , to Turkmenistan and the oil field there ? 
Are American livesS well spent in thei " Middle East " endevor ? 
Are we just mercenariesS for big oil , not liberatorsS spreading " Freedom " ? 
Is this really just flag - waving propaganda ? 
What , exactly did we win in Iraq ? 
CheaperR Oil ? 
I think not ! 
Gratitude of a Free nation ? 
I think not ! 
Why has the " Rust Belt " come into being ? 
What were we doing ? 
Where did the great society for all , the one we were told we were building go ? 
Japan ? 
China ? 
To the Uber-Rich ? 
As we sink into our own ruinsS , the dark horse rides on America ! 
The dark horse rides on ! 
Sad . 

Lumpy 22 . Oct , 2009 at 3:14 pm 
Green movement ? 
You gotta be kidding me ! 
Earth to Jessica : DemocratsS caused this . 
They have the unmidas touch . 
Every decaying city in America has D 's firmly in control , and has forever . 

When you said you were naive , you were n't kidding . 

Jessica Reeder 22 . Oct , 2009 at 3:36 pm 
Nope , I was n't kidding . 
Put it in writing , did n't I ? 

Lumpy , I 'm not a Democrat and I do n't much approve of the Democratic Party . 
Just so we 're clear on that . 
I do n't think you present a fully - informed argument on the causesS of urban decay , but I do n't disagree with you . 

I 'm not particularly interested in whose$ fault this mess is ; rather , I choose to focus on how we 're going to clean it up . 
That 's where the green movement comes in , and when I say " green " I 'm talking plantsS not politicsS . 

If you 've got some fancy new technology at Boeing that can do moreR for peopleS 's health and happiness ( and for lessR cost ) than a victory garden can do , please let me know . 

Raggedy Anarchy 24 . Oct , 2009 at 6:17 pm 
Last I checked , greed , sloth , hubris and waste were all pretty universally human traitsS , and I see no halosS around either LibertariansS , DemsS or even anarchically green-at-heart . 

I agree -- DemocratsS , like country music , have disappointed me too many timesS in the past for me to keep on listening . 
But here 's the thing -- frogsS are mutating due to the planet trying to kill itself . 
SalmonS have forgot how to screw . 
OttersS in post-Valdez Alaska are clawing their own petro - chemical - burned eyesS out in pain . 

The patient is earth , and it 's not getting betterR . 
You want to yell at which insurance company fucked up , or change a bedpan , so to speak ? 
During timesS of crisis ( which this is ) , the ones who will create positive change are those who accept the hand they are dealt and act . 
The onesS who are educated and informed and attached to delegating moral judgementsS will be perfectly equipped to deal with a world that no longer exists . 
Just ask the PalestiniansS who left after the first war to cry over the past . 
Or ask my Paiute grandfather . 
* Or even Friend Salmon , who still haunts my dreamsS and tells me not to let us blow each other 's assesS off the earth until we clean up the mess we have made . 

* That was for Lumpy . 
Nobody gets laughed at alone in my presence . 

Raggedy Anarchy 24 . Oct , 2009 at 6:21 pm 
" ... when I say “ green ” I ’ m talking plantsS not politicsS . " 

Wall- E. 

Eric 01 . Nov , 2009 at 10:33 pm 
There is now a house for $10 listed on realtor . com 

Helena 19 . Nov , 2009 at 1:06 pm 
You told me about this , but it has to be seen to be believed ( not that I did n't believe you ! ) . 
The richestS country in the world ... ? ! 

Fred E. 18 . Jan , 2010 at 8:09 pm 
Do n't forget about the back taxesS ! 

Parker 15 . May , 2010 at 6:56 am 
I find this topic fascinating . 
I was born in a suburb of Detroit and mostS of family still lives there . 
I will be going back to visit in June . 
I plan to take a ( Daytime ) tour of these decaying areasS especially the old factoriesS . 
I have the urban explorer fascination . 
However , the main reason I wanted to post was to say to " Lumpy " , " the democratsS have the unmidas touch " , LMAO , that is classic . 
and I must agree with Lumpy . 
Freaking hillarious and so true . 
ThanksS Lump - man . 
BTW , great blog and great info . 
Peace . 

Brad 14 . Oct , 2010 at 7:02 pm 
I , too checked out a few listingsS for under $1,000 and was absolutely shocked at the property taxesS . 
A $1,000 house , which could be fixed up into maybe a $ 30 - 40,000 house comes with a tax bill of $ 4 - 6 K per year ! 
The taxesS on my $140K house in an urban area of Mississippi are only $ 1500 / year . 
Additionally , even if you paid cash for the house , you 'd probably want to carry some homeowner 's insurance with all the inherent risksS to the property ( arson , vandalism ) , and I 'm sure it 's sky - high , given those risksS . 

